──────────────── README.md ─────────────────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃                Baseplane                 ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛

A genome is not three billion equally       
expensive tokens. Can its organization guide
how we compute on it?                       

Baseplane aims to build hierarchical,       
learned floating-point representations of   
genome-wide information while staying       
grounded in exact sequence. Its hypothesis  
is that useful biological organization can  
make relevant information computationally   
close, without forcing every later operation
to pay equally for every intervening base.  

The useful hierarchy is part of what the    
encoder must learn. Baseplane therefore     
cannot assume a complete genome-wide map of 
biologically meaningful objects before      
representation begins. It can prepare the   
machinery; the current information must help
decide how that machinery is used.          


Adapt the information flow, not a forest of 
                  branches                  

Nearby sequence is a natural starting point 
because it is cheap to bring together on a  
computer, and locality is often a useful    
biochemical clue. This is an opportunity to 
exploit—not a compulsory distance weight, an
annotation catalogue, or a separate         
cis/trans architecture. More distant        
information must remain accessible as the   
representation develops.                    

The CUDA experiments ask whether that       
conditional computation can be expressed    
through collective operations: turn         
decisions into masks, regroup or compose    
information, and allocate richer            
floating-point work where it is useful. The 
same question applies at more than one      
scale. Warp-level bit operations are a      
concrete experiment in this design, not     
Baseplane's endpoint.                       

                                            
 exact sequence and current representations 
     → cheap local/collective computation   
     → adaptive composition, routing and    
 refinement                                 
     → richer hierarchical representations  
                                            

The long-term idea extends to other highly  
parallel accelerators; CUDA is the current  
experimental platform. Keeping exact        
sequence available does not make every      
learned embedding lossless, nor does a      
routing decision establish a biological     
mechanism.                                  


              What exists now               

The exact-sequence library provides compact 
representations, validity/coordinate        
contracts, scalar references and optional   
CUDA paths. The isolated CUDA lab has now   
been compiled and run: all four experiments 
have records, and a two-level affine-summary
candidate remains. The lab is still a set of
untrained synthetic experiments, not a      
trained genome model.                       


       What the experiments taught us       

The selected CarryFold study is a historical
synthetic control: CUB was faster than      
custom scan at both measured sizes, while   
the restricted ordered affine summary       
composed across two levels. The result page 
states its scope and exclusions. The linked 
lab selection report preserves other        
outcomes; no trained genome model or        
biological validation is claimed.           

The results index links to the single       
selected historical study and the full lab  
selection report.                           


           Explore the repository           

Start with the design, source map, or       
build/use guide. The current snapshot       
explains which exact-sequence operations and
experimental hierarchy paths exist.         

How the projects fit together: Baseplane    
owns sequence meaning and provenance;       
Cellerator owns general structured numerical
execution; GlassHelix asks which dynamical  
mechanisms the observations support.        

Baseplane is an experimental research       
project, not yet a validated whole-genome   
learned model.                              
────────────── docs/index.md ───────────────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃            Reading Baseplane             ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛

Understand the idea: README → design → the  
shared program.                             

See what exists: current snapshot → selected
results.                                    

Work on it: build/use → source map → the    
relevant subsystem and test.                

Use an agent: AGENTS.md and the live        
task—not every historical plan.             

Read the history: archive guide. Historical 
evidence remains evidence for its recorded  
code/conditions, not a statement of current 
design.                                     
───────── docs/design/overview.md ──────────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃ Baseplane: construct the representation  ┃
┃            while computing it            ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛


                The question                

An entire genome is a large sequence, but   
not every useful question needs equally     
expensive interaction with every base. Can  
hierarchical representations make that      
information accessible at a cost shaped by  
useful organization rather than raw span    
alone?                                      

Baseplane's endpoint includes learned       
floating-point embeddings. Compact DNA and  
exact bit-level predicates are the grounding
layer, not a substitute for learning or the 
project's complete identity. Exact sequence,
coordinates, strand and validity remain     
available beneath higher representations. An
accessible source is not a proof that a     
lossy summary preserves every task-relevant 
fact.                                       


   Do not put the answer in a preparatory   
                   oracle                   

Cellerator can discover substantial system  
structure before compiling repeated         
execution. Baseplane is trying to infer     
useful sequence organization during         
representation. It may compile a vocabulary 
of transforms, use learned parameters, pack 
sequence and revisit inputs. It must not    
assume a completed biological hierarchy and 
then count only the inexpensive operation on
that hierarchy as the cost of discovery.    

“Online” here means input-dependent         
structure is built as part of encoding. It  
does not forbid multiple passes, exact      
preprocessing or reuse within a run. The    
important accounting boundary includes the  
work that creates routing, candidates,      
summaries and refinements.                  


Locality is an affordance, not a biological 
                  verdict                   

Contiguous sequence is naturally cheap to   
load and process together. This provides a  
useful starting organization, without an    
explicit mandatory genomic-distance         
weighting or a separate cis/trans model. It 
does not prove that the important           
relationship is local. Higher               
representations may reorganize information, 
and source coordinates remain recoverable   
after that reorganization.                  

A global relation is not free just because  
its eventual participants fit in a warp.    
Candidate discovery, movement and           
missed/colliding matches must be measured.  
Known annotations may help, but must not    
become the complete ontology of what can    
matter.                                     


        Conditional information flow        

A conventional branch tree gives different  
lanes different programs. Baseplane instead 
experiments with collective operations that 
turn current decisions into data: masks,    
compacted records, composable transforms,   
routing keys or refinement requests. Those  
data determine the next regular operation.  
Fewer source-level branches is not itself   
success; extra arithmetic, registers,       
movement and unused work can make a         
branchless formulation slower.              

This principle should recur across scales. A
physical warp tile is not a biological      
segmentation rule. Every hierarchical       
proposal must explain its seam behavior,    
order sensitivity, source map, summary      
losses and route for retrieving missing     
detail.                                     


The completed CUDA lab is evidence, not the 
             final architecture             

The lab tested four ways of mapping         
information to execution: Boolean evidence  
into floating summaries (BitLift),          
composable conditional history (CarryFold), 
selected objects into cooperative work      
(Rethread), and runtime keys into peer      
groups (Rendezvous). The recorded result    
retained only CarryFold's restricted ordered
affine representation as a bounded          
candidate; CUB was its faster executor.     
Other fixtures exposed costs or information 
loss.                                       

That is useful progress: the mechanism,     
executor and scientific utility are separate
things to evaluate. Untrained synthetic     
fixtures do not establish an organism-scale 
encoder. The current project should keep the
useful substrate and the failed hypotheses  
legible without freezing them into a        
universal API.                              


  Relationship to the rest of the program   

Baseplane owns sequence meaning and         
provenance. It may use Cellerator's         
numerical execution without abandoning its  
encoding question. GlassHelix can eventually
use sequence-grounded information to        
constrain hypotheses about dynamics;        
sequence compatibility alone is not causal  
evidence. FPGA/streaming realizations remain
a longer-term possibility; this cleanup adds
no FPGA backend.                            

See current capabilities, results and the   
source map.                                 
────────── docs/status/current.md ──────────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃     Current implementation snapshot      ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛

Inspected: 2026-09-29 · Source:             
271843a2d2ceff434c97c8eb5fd13555567034c4    

This is a human-readable source snapshot,   
not a second task ledger. Revalidate it     
after a meaningful implementation change;   
the live project workflow holds task/claim  
state.                                      


           Implemented facilities           

The exact substrate supplies packed         
sequence, explicit validity/tail semantics, 
bounded local coordinates and global        
origins, scalar references, public exact    
count/emit entry points, and bounded        
predicate description/verification          
facilities. CUDA is optional. The isolated  
CUDA lab has completed its four synthetic   
experiments with a final combined-source    
replay and sanitizer receipts; see its      
current README and START_HERE guide.        


    Experimental or deliberately bounded    

BitLift, CarryFold, Rethread and Rendezvous 
are isolated experiments. The final         
selection retained one restricted ordered   
affine representation (CarryFold), with CUB 
as the faster measured executor. Rethread   
did not win its large fixture; BitLift loses
arrangement/magnitude information;          
Rendezvous missed cross-warp peers and used 
oracle-assembled candidate packets. No      
public Baseplane API changed in that epic.  


     Future intent and outstanding work     

A trained genome-wide hierarchical          
embedding, general online context           
construction and scientifically demonstrated
nonlocal representation remain future work. 
The older BitOp CUDA/backend tasks are not  
all complete merely because the independent 
lab finished. Do not require those old tasks
to be completed for this documentation pass.


          Important qualifications          

All lab weights and routing keys were       
untrained. Device-resident timings exclude  
allocation and transfer; some information   
probes are scalar fixtures. At the inspected
head, the working tree showed active Todo   
projection updates and this documentation   
package; preserve them. No source edits were
reported by git status. The inventory is a  
classification aid, not deletion authority. 

See the source map for current code paths,  
results for measured evidence, and design   
for the scientific purpose that these       
facilities serve.                           
────────── docs/results/index.md ───────────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃       Results and useful failures        ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛

 • CUB beat custom scan on untrained affine 
   fixtures. In these untrained synthetic   
   affine-summary fixtures, CUB had a lower 
   recorded median than the custom scan at  
   both tested sizes. The defined ordered   
   summary composed exactly across two      
   levels with source intervals, but this   
   does not establish sequence utility or a 
   learned genomic hierarchy.               


     Selection report and claim limits      

The original lab selection report preserves 
the full bounded experiment decisions,      
including Rethread, BitLift, and Rendezvous.
They are not additional selected result     
pages here.                                 

The August exact-count measurement remains  
historical and is described in its original 
record. It is not a genome-embedding        
throughput claim. Synthetic experiments     
establish bounded numerical or systems      
behavior, not biological validity.          
─────── docs/results/bp-carryfold.md ───────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃ CUB beat custom scan on untrained affine ┃
┃                 fixtures                 ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛

Evidence state: verified historical         

Did custom hierarchical scan lower the cost 
of the same bounded affine-summary          
computation?                                

In these untrained synthetic affine-summary 
fixtures, CUB had a lower recorded median   
than the custom scan at both tested sizes.  
The defined ordered summary composed exactly
across two levels with source intervals, but
this does not establish sequence utility or 
a learned genomic hierarchy.                

🌆 CUB beat custom scan on untrained affine 
fixtures                                    

                                            
                      Custom           CUB  
                  producer +    producer +  
  Case             scan (ms)     scan (ms)  
 ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━ 
  n = 1,025         0.019456      0.016384  
  records                                   
  n = 65,536        0.070656      0.059392  
  records                                   
                                            


             What was measured              

Scope: Device-resident coefficient/gate     
producer plus complete inclusive affine scan
pipeline, with scratch preallocated.        
Statistic: Median of 31 device-event samples
in one recorded invocation. Uncertainty: P95
values are retained in each raw receipt; no 
confidence interval or independent repeat is
available.                                  

Hardware: Tesla V100-SXM2-16GB / sm_70      

Cuda: 12.9.86 (cudart 12090)                

Precision: float, Release without fast math 
(as recorded)                               

Warmups: 3 device-pipeline calls before     
timing, confirmed by the recorded driver    

Repeats: 31 timed samples per variant at    
each size; one invocation per receipt       

Source: Final integrated replay; all six    
recorded SHA-256 source hashes match the    
current lab files.                          


         Interpretation and limits          

 • Synthetic four-float records with        
   untrained fixture parameters; no         
   biological sequence labels or            
   genome-derived inputs.                   
 • Device-resident pipeline only: excludes  
   allocation, host fixture construction,   
   H2D/D2H, and result interpretation.      
 • The two sample sizes and variants are one
   recorded invocation each (31 timed       
   samples); p95 is not a confidence        
   interval.                                
 • The final combined-source replay is      
   distinct from earlier per-case receipts. 
   This result uses only the final          
   combined-source receipts and does not    
   pool them.                               
 • This is an exactness/cost observation for
   a restricted affine operator, not        
   evidence of general context construction 
   or information preservation.             
 • Tracked raw receipts contain the original
   machine-local binary path in their       
   command field; their recorded stdout is  
   path-independent, and the reproduction   
   recipe below uses relative repository    
   commands.                                


            Reproduce / inspect             

Historical recipe only; no rerun was made   
for this documentation pass. With CUDA 12.9,
sm_70, and the canonical controller holding 
the assigned GPU resource, use:             

                                            
 python3 experiments/cuda_lab/tools/run.py  
 \                                          
   --phase build-cuda \                     
   --build-dir                              
 build-bitop-BP-CUDA-LAB-final-cuda         
 python3 experiments/cuda_lab/results/\     
 selection/replay.py parent                 
 python3 experiments/cuda_lab/tools/\       
 check.py --all-results                     
                                            

The replay runs the recorded all-case       
sanitizer and benchmark checks. Do not      
invoke its GPU work without the actual      
exclusive resource lease.                   

Original recorded explanation · observed    
2026-09-29 at                               
e37f85b4f651a1cddfcb481610ecff94e735d03f.   

Inspected implementation: driver.cu.        

Measurement source: Final combined-source   
replay; source hashes are recorded in       
results/selection/source_hashes.json.       
(different from the current document-read   
revision where stated).                     

Portable evidence: report.md,               
final-bench-1025.json,                      
final-bench-65536.json, source_hashes.json, 
final-memcheck.json, final-initcheck.json,  
final-racecheck.json, final-synccheck.json. 

Chart/table input · All selected results    
──────── docs/development/start.md ─────────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃         Build, use and validate          ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛

Start with one supported path rather than   
every historical target. Commands below must
be qualified against the source version in  
the current snapshot.                       

                                            
 cmake -S . -B build-docs-cpu               
 -DBASEPLANE_ENABLE_CUDA=OFF                
 cmake --build build-docs-cpu --target      
 baseplaneDna2Test                          
 baseplaneBitOpContractTest                 
 baseplaneDna2ValidityTest -j 4             
 ./build-docs-cpu/baseplaneDna2Test         
 ./build-docs-cpu/baseplaneBitOpContractTes 
 t                                          
 ./build-docs-cpu/baseplaneDna2ValidityTest 
 # Isolated lab scalar checks do not        
 require a GPU.                             
 python3 experiments/cuda_lab/tools/run.py  
 --phase host --case all --build-dir        
 build-docs-lab-host                        
                                            

For the optional CUDA build use the         
installed compatible toolchain and          
-DBASEPLANE_ENABLE_CUDA=ON. Build/run the   
lab with its existing runner and leased GPU 
procedure; do not invoke a performance phase
while merely rebuilding these documents.    


        Work on a bounded component         

Follow the source map, inspect its nearest  
guidance and tests, and keep an             
example/reference beside the behavior it    
exercises. A documentation change does not  
require a full hardware campaign. A source  
move does require updating                  
build/install/import/include references and 
rerunning the affected targets.             

For measured claims follow results. Use     
assigned resources; record command, source, 
toolchain, input, precision, outputs,       
warmup/repeats and timed phases. Keep       
profiler diagnostics separate from benchmark
timings. Preserve the original evidence when
rendering new documentation.                


     Code and documentation boundaries      

Durable design goes in docs/design/,        
practical instructions here, dated summaries
in docs/status/, and evidence in            
docs/results/ linked to original records.   
Use experiments for unpromoted mechanisms.  
Generated Todo state and historical notes   
are not substitute architecture.            
────── docs/development/source-map.md ──────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃      Source map: exact input, then       ┃
┃       experimental representation        ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛

                                            
                              What to look  
  Question      Start here    for           
 ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━ 
  What is the   CPU-safe      Public        
  current       include       library       
  exact-sequ…                 entry; not    
  entry?                      the eventual  
                              full encoder  
                              API.          
  How are       validity      Exact source  
  invalid       contract      semantics     
  bases,                      and chunk     
  tails and                   identity.     
  coordinates                               
  represente…                               
  Where are     scalar,       Same-operat…  
  reference     CUDA          comparisons   
  and GPU                     and explicit  
  paths?                      buffer/stre…  
                              behavior.     
  What tests    sequence      Boundary,     
  protect       tests         validity,     
  exact                       capacity and  
  behavior?                   output        
                              contracts.    
  Where are     CUDA lab,     Four          
  the online    driver        experiments,  
  representa…                 their         
  experiment…                 current       
                              implementat…  
                              and           
                              comparators.  
  What          selection     One bounded   
  survived      report        representat…  
  the                         candidate;    
  experiment…                 measured      
                              failures are  
                              preserved.    
                                            

The root build and isolated lab build serve 
different purposes. Do not merge the lab    
into the exact library just to make the tree
look uniform. A shared test/driver split is 
justified only if the actual files have     
become difficult to navigate; the default   
source disposition is to keep this useful   
separation.                                 
───────────── CONTRIBUTING.md ──────────────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃           Developing Baseplane           ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛

Start with the scientific/design overview,  
then the build and development guide and    
source map. The current snapshot            
distinguishes shipped facilities from       
experimental and future work.               

Prefer a small, evidence-bearing change.    
Keep the claim attached to the code and     
tests that support it; document the regime  
where a computational shortcut helps or     
fails. New public abstractions need a real  
consumer, not just architectural symmetry.  

Coding agents additionally follow AGENTS.md 
and the live scoped workflow. Project       
Control/Todo is the operational authority;  
README is not a task tracker. Benchmark     
contributors follow the results methodology.
──────────────── AGENTS.md ─────────────────
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃         Repository work contract         ┃
┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛

Read the design for intent, current snapshot
for its dated implementation boundary, and  
source map for entry points. For an edit,   
the current scoped task and inspected       
source—not a historical plan or README      
completion sentence—determine what exists   
and what is authorized.                     


    Operate within the current authority    

Use the installed Project Control/Codex     
front door and this repository's Todo       
authority. Take one bounded outcome, inspect
only what it needs, preserve other          
claims/dirty work, and finish with actual   
evidence. Delegate bounded research,        
implementation, tests and review to         
configured Codex subagents when useful; the 
owner retains task lifecycle and final      
acceptance. Do not use Project Control      
delegate_task or local-coding-worker for    
ordinary delegated implementation; local    
workers are reserved for Project Control    
observers. Never edit SQLite, generated Todo
views, recovery snapshots or generated      
context indexes by hand. Keep managed       
workflow blocks intact.                     


Preserve the architecture while changing the
               implementation               

 • Preserve exact sequence identity,        
   coordinates, strand, validity and        
   provenance; do not treat invalid packed  
   payloads as biology.                     
 • Keep online hierarchical floating-point  
   representation as the goal. Packed       
   predicates are a foundation, not the     
   whole project; no preparatory oracle may 
   supply the hierarchy being claimed as    
   learned.                                 
 • Measure information loss and             
   candidate/routing/revisit costs. A source
   map is not proof of a lossless embedding.
 • Keep CPU reference correctness and       
   optional CUDA usability; caller-owned    
   buffers, explicit                        
   streams/capacity/overflow and target     
   capability remain visible.               
 • The isolated CUDA lab is experimental,   
   not a production interface. Preserve its 
   evidence and completed negative          
   decisions. Cellerator general numerical  
   ownership and Baseplane sequence-native  
   experiments must not be conflated.       

External compatibility is not an absolute   
constraint at this stage. A reviewed        
internal move may change names/interfaces if
it improves development; repair real sibling
consumers and relevant tests together.      
Frozen contracts and overlapping active work
still require their owner's explicit        
reconciliation. Do not use a documentation  
task to rewrite numerical behavior,         
introduce another planner, or complete      
unrelated old epics.                        


           Validate what changed            

Use the development guide for the current   
commands. Run affected source/build/tests   
after code moves. For prose-only changes    
check links, status boundaries and rendered 
pages. Keep scientific claims scoped; record
what was not run. Benchmarks require the    
existing assigned resources and clean timing
interval. Include setup/transfer/routing    
when the claim needs them; no benchmark is  
launched by document generation.            

Current work belongs in live status tools;  
experimental findings in results; durable   
rationale in design/development docs;       
superseded plans in the archive. Do not     
recreate the same mutable status table in   
all four places.                            
